So, if you're one of the few people who read
my article discussing my experience studying
the Cree language at First Nations University
of Canada (F.N.U.),
if you're one of the people who read that
article then you already know my experience
inside that university was very bad, but that
is not the answer to the question, "Why did
I stop studying Cree as a language?"
The amazing thing about the Algonquian languages
is the diversity and the [extent of the] territory
they cover.
The furthest language to the west is Yurok,
out in California; the Algonquian languages
went all the way east to the eastern seaboard,
the east coast of Canda, and what's now New
York City.
Before the British killed everyone there who
could speak the language, the indigenous language
spoken in what's now Manhattan [was] indeed
an Algonquian language.
So, this [language family] covered, in a complex
map, a tremendous diversity of terrain, and
a tremendous diversity of languages and dialects.
So the opportunity to work on Algonquian languages
was definitely not exclusive to First Nations
University.
I was over 30 years old when I wanted to make
this transition in my life, and both for me
personally, and for these languages themselves,
on a bigger scale, the opportunity was very
much now-or-never.
Any research you want to do on the indigenous
languages of Canada, you've got to do it now,
or it's going to be never.
If you want to do a preservation project,
an education project, to stop these languages
from [being] endangered, do it now, because
in 20 years it is going to be too late.
If you want to get out and interview people,
elderly, retired people, who can speak the
language fluently (or nearly-fluently), you've
got to do that research now.
Ten years from now, they'll be dead.
The last fluent speakers, everywhere you go,
are elderly people, and the average life-span
on a reservation is not what it is in the
comfort of Canada's big cities.
You've got people living in tough conditions
now who often have had incredibly tough lives,
from the cradle to the grave, and yeah, you
could make contact with people who are fluent
speakers, and they could die at 55.
Life can be short when you've struggled with
the circumstances that many of Canada's First
Nations people have struggled with.
Many, not all, of course; here and there,
there are exceptions.
As everyone knows, part of the tragedy of
Canada's First Nations is that life can be
nasty, brutal and short, when you're an indigenous
person, living in the British Empire.
I'm trying not to mask my emotions here.
I wanted to spend the rest of my life working
on these political issues that I've just been
talking about, and the fact that one institution
couldn't deliver on its promises was not enough
to end that dream.
And, in many ways, [that] was something I
had been expecting from the first day I set
foot in that institution.
The scandals surrounding that institution,
and the Canadian government's threats to shut
it down, those were all in the newspapers
just around the time I signed up.
Although the government had just lately backed
down from its threats and agreed to continue
funding the university.
Many of the professors had just quit, just
that month, people had walked out, maybe a
couple of months before.
I met ex-professors, people who had quit on
point of principle, in the midst of that scandal.
And my very first day walking into that university,
which was also the day I got off the airplane
from Asia, one of the professors I spoke to
was very honest with me and said, "Look, this
is an institution in crisis, don't have any
false hopes or expectations about it".
I appreciated his honesty, but, for me also,
the opportunity was now-or-never.
It was urgent.
I had to work hard as hell to get a new career
going in those languages, while I was still
in my early 30s, so that I could be speaking
pretty fluently by the time I got to my early
40s.
That's a tremendous uphill struggle for languages
that have very few people who speak them fluently
and very few resources, and I was committed
to doing that.
On paper, what I did was I enrolled as a B.A.
student, [but] of course, I already had a
B.A., but that was so that I could get into
classes right away, and I was looking at a
tremendous diversity of M.A. programs and
PhD programs, coast-to-coast.
There were university programs in Quebec,
there were university programs in British
Columbia, connected to Algonquian languages
and First Nations languages.
I'm not saying that any of those programs
are good; perhaps each one is a disaster in
its own special way, but certainly a diversity
of options and opportunities to look at.
No, the very simple reason for why that career
had to end, why I had to give up on all of
my ambitions, was that the opportunity had
been created in the first place by my marriage.
And it was ended by my marriage.
When my wife decided that she wanted to quit
the job that she had in Canada, the job that
created the foothold (financially and even
geographically) for me to be able to study
these languages and work toward that future,
when she made the decision that she wanted
to quit, I felt that my role was to support
her in that decision, and to work for the
future of my marriage, not for the future
of my career, or my own education.
I felt that was the top priority.
Now, it's very easy in hindsight to say that
was the wrong decision, because, today, I
am divorced.
And, again, the intellectual and emotional
consequences of these decisions, they weren't
just real for me, they also had a huge impact
on my wife, and they were significant contributors...
[no,] probably the single most important contributor
to why we got divorced, were the consequences
--the fallout-- of the end of my career in
First Nations studies.
Not that I personally felt there was anything
inevitable about that.
But you view time a little bit differently
when you think you're in a marriage that's
going to last until the day you die, that's
going to last until your old age.
Even if you've been through 5 years that were
terrible, it's easy to tell yourself, "Well,
I have to see those 5 years as one chapter
in a much longer story that's going to continue
until I'm in my 80s".
Even if you've just been breaking your own
heart to try to create a new career in Canada
(and to try to support my wife and marriage)
because of the sudden requirement that I leave
Asia and start a new life in Canada, and start
[with] a totally new set of linguistic and
political issues,
Uh, y'know, it's easy to convince yourself
that you have to see those two years as one
chapter in a long story that may go on until
you're past 80 years old.
And, even looking back, what was the alternative
to supporting my wife, in her decision to
quit her job and leave Canada?
The alternative was to get divorced at that
moment.
The alternative was for me to say, "No, my
education matters more, my career matters
more, and my commitment to First Nations languages
and peoples matters more than this marriage,
so we're getting divorced, now".
I could have done that.
I can honestly say that option did not enter
my mind.
And one of the reasons for that was, very
simply, that I felt grateful that that opportunity
had been created for me at all.
This also explains why I created the Youtube
channel.
This youtube channel is not to promote my
career... [end].